A month ago, we saw body cam footage of the murder of Sonya Massey, a thirty-six year-old Black woman, in her home, by a white cop. Ten days ago, a trainee doctor, Moumita Debnath, was raped and murdered at a hospital in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Six weeks ago, we witnessed the attempted assassination of former president, Donald Trump, at a rally in Pennsylvania, which initially promised to return him to the White House. The ongoing war on Gaza; the ongoing war in Ukraine; the ongoing war in Sudan. The world is on fire, due to the manmade disaster of climate change.
A confession: I am numb. I have been numb for a long time. I care deeply about so much that is happening in this country and in our world. And I can often barely feel it.
I suspect I am not alone in this. I was first numbstruck—as it were—during the run-up to Donald Trump’s election, where his racism, misogyny, and profound ignorance seemed only to attract many voters. I was working at the time on my first book, Down Girl, and delving deeply into cases of strangulation, rape, and family annihilation—men who murder their wives and children, often before committing suicide. I could only work on such deeply upsetting topics by deliberately numbing myself to my emotions: anger, fear, sadness, even rage. I have felt such rage for girls and women. I could not bear to keep feeling it. The work had to go on. And so I turned myself off.
At times I thought it was mostly me. My relationship to anger is particularly fraught and ambivalent. I have long read, and admired, the large feminist and anti-racist literature defending two theses: (1) that those of us involved in these struggles are angry, and (2) that this anger can be highly politically valuable under certain conditions. I don’t doubt (2), but I am not so sure of (1) anymore. Speaking for my own part, I find anger difficult to keep feeling without misdirecting, and difficult to keep feeling simpliciter without succumbing to exhaustion. And so I numb myself.
On the point about misdirection: feelings of anger characteristically manifest in an angry demeanor, as Amia Srinivasan has argued, in her paper “The Aptness of Anger.” As the title suggests, Srinivasan is defending the aptness of anger as a response to the wrongs and injustice so prevalent in our world. For marginalized people in particular, venting anger toward those in power who are wronging you can be fitting and courageous, if sometimes dangerous and arguably counterproductive, as Srinivasan freely acknowledges. This leads to a dilemma for people in such positions: get angry, fittingly, and run risks to yourself and what you care about; or, suppress your anger for the sake of prudence, and experience the “affective injustice” of not getting to air—or even metabolize—your just grievances.
This is an interesting argument that I am largely persuaded by. But what interests me here is that an angry mien is hard not to turn on people in one’s vicinity much more generally, which is a particular concern for those of us who are marginalized in some ways and powerful in others. This constitutes, I would add, the vast majority of people. Take me, as a woman and public-facing feminist, who sometimes faces online abuse and vitriol. It would be easy and in some ways natural to get angry about this. But then what about the people around me who would have to face this anger? My students, my friends and family, and most importantly, my young daughter.
Of course, the easy way out of this would seem to be this: direct your anger carefully, and be mindful of power differentials when letting out your feelings. But, for much the reasons Srinivasan outlines, it’s not so simple in reality. She considers the possibility that the dilemma above can be resolved by telling the angry person that she is entitled to feel angry, but shouldn’t express it in ways that could be counterproductive for the causes she believes in (lest it alienate people, make them defensive, and so on). But, for many of us, the way we feel anger is by getting angry, bodily. So telling someone to feel angry without showing it is a bit like saying to someone who sings soprano: sing all you like! Just do it in a low register. That’s an empty permission slip, given that the way she actually sings has been effectively prohibited.
Similarly, I think that telling someone she can get angry as long as she directs it very carefully only goes so far, given the way anger manifests in our faces and our bodies. If I am visibly furious, and I am around my students, friends and family, and—again—most importantly, my four year-old, I will read as angry in ways that cannot be easily undone by telling them, even if truly, that I’m not angry at them, specifically. I think of this particularly in parenting as I practice it. To me, an angry grown-up who’s much bigger than you, and who has so much power over you—whether we want to or not—seems like such a scary prospect. It’s hard not to glean a hint of violence that lurks in even the most well-controlled display of tense muscles, gritted teeth, bunched fists, and so on. And I think it is reasonable to find that frightening, especially at an age where you can’t really understand assurances that, while mommy may be angry, she’s not angry at you, sweetheart. She’s angry at the man who just called her a fat evil cunt on the internet.
And so I try not to be angry. I have my moments, of course, like anyone. But I try very hard not to get angry around my daughter.
The result is a lot of calm, self-regulated parenting that bleeds into much of what I do and feel in the rest of my life as well. But I don’t think it’s just parenting and other acts of deliberate numbing that have me (not) feeling this way. As my colleague Shaun Nichols has argued, it’s plausible that our emotional mechanisms can become habituated—over-saturated with the cues that characteristically produce certain feelings—in ways that lead to numbness. In his example, his endodonist’s normal sensitivity to others’ pain and distress has been reduced because she sees so many people in pain from root canals on a daily basis. She has, by her own admission, become inured to it. Similarly, I suspect that we’re exposed to so many news stories that are anger and outrage-inducing that our emotional mechanisms are inundated, reeling, flooded. We don’t feel what we would ordinarily feel because our emotional systems are overwhelmed. We might know rationally that the situation is intolerable, outrageous, infuriating. But we are numbstruck.
What happens when the natural or even adaptive individual response—being calm and collected in the face of repeated onslaught—is radically at odds with what is collectively required—anger or even outrage—to animate the kind of political action we need? The answer is a world of people quietly doom-scrolling on our phones as the world burns: disaster.
I don’t know what to do or even say about any of this. But what I hang onto are moments of feeling that remind me of what I’m capable of. I don’t think it’s an accident that the tenderest parts of me—the parts most likely to be provoked as well as moved—are connected to nurturing impulses that belong to both parents and non-parents. When the seventeen year-old Gus Walz teared up, yelling “That’s my Dad!” at the DNC, pointing at his father, Democratic VP nominee Tim Walz, I felt profoundly moved—and protective of Gus, as a neurodivergent person and a young person and simply, a person. I knew he would be subject to the mockery and ire of ghouls like Ann Coulter. And I felt rage that this would be so: that we would question the right of anyone to feel and express joy and pride with such innocence and conviction.
I know in my heart that, as my daughter grows older, it will be important for her to see me get angry from time to time, and to understand that anger as directed in service of more vulnerable people, who need our support and protection. I know that numbness is natural and not the worst option, but not the best option, either. I don’t know quite how to wake myself up from it. Readers, can you relate at all to this feeling of numbness when you know you ought to feel anger? And, if so, what do you do, if anything, to feel your own rage again?