I have a job that I hate.
I have a stressful college major.
I also happen to write on Substack. THAT makes me happy.
In fact, it has made me so happy that it’s practically consuming my thoughts every day. “What if I’m not delivering quality content?, “What if I actually suck at writing for Substack and no one tells me anything?”- these are some of the thoughts that go through my head every day.
But still, I manage to say ‘Fuck you’ to all my crippling anxiety and self doubt and I do make sure to try and write something different every week. Is it a hobby? Is it a passion? It’s most certainly not my job, I’m not getting paid to do this shit, that’s for sure.
But I just love doing this. For the people here, for my friends here, for the new friends I make every day, for the comments that call me indulgent for no reason (they make me laugh so hard) and it’s all a fucking peach until people start actually paying attention to you. And by that, I mean copying you.
Don’t you just love getting copied? I do. I love seeing all my work get so undervalued, I love seeing all my friends go behind paywalls just so that they at least get paid for being copied, I love confronting them in the DMs and basically getting a ‘You didn’t invent this subject’ in response. Classic. Beautiful.
I don’t even know why I copyright my work anymore, if it is THAT easy.
Don’t get me wrong, this is definitely a place to be inspired. It isn’t a crime to get inspiration. Most creators/ writers even feel honored to be inspos for you. So talk to them.
Send a DM, an email, anything. We all see you clicking the same post three hundred fucking times in a short period of time. I honestly don’t get the issue of saying “I was inspired by..” . But maybe that’s just me. With so many information available on social media, we all want to stand out, we all want to write the next most original thing, we all want to be the refreshing voice, we all want to be in tune with everything - but not everyone can be.
Isn’t it such a bummer to get a ‘good job’ in the comments for something you obviously didn’t come up with? Isn’t it such a bummer to completely dismiss a creator’s feelings by stealing from them just because they have a large following? God, even Lana Del Rey is seeing all the comments you’ve been making about her new boyfriend (something deeply unnecessary and weird), so why wouldn’t I see people on Substack copying my work? That I so carefully copyrighted? I see you. Bummer, no?
Make arrangements with your favorite creators, or simply tell them what you’re about to do. You’re not stealing from a huge corporation that doesn’t care if you live or die, you’re stealing from a human being, someone who putted all their time and their effort into this, and someone who’s probably not getting paid a single cent for this. Or getting terribly burned out and terribly underpaid (being a writer, essentially).
And if you’re a creator (even with no followers at all), please copyright your work. Be protected, because we’re not valued at all. This isn’t a valued profession, not even on social media, where everything is apparently ‘so easy’. We’re being ripped off by people every single minute. I, too, got my submission stolen and didn’t get paid. By a “serious” magazine. And you thought I wasn’t going to say anything about this on Substack? Just because social media can be a no man’s land, doesn’t mean I’m not going to take my work seriously.