It would seem that, once again, people are getting mighty sick of autocrats, both real and wannabe.
Yesterday, Hillbilly Vanilli took a break from furniture fornication to give a speech at the International Association of Firefighters conference in Boston, during which he said that he and the Danger Yam are “proud to be the most pro-workers Republican ticket in history.” And then he got booed, because fuck that guy.
This won’t go down in history as a famous Boo-urns, because I’m hopeful that in a few months we’re all going to forget about Mr. Vance forever. I’ll return to the upcoming election in a moment. Before that, I wish to relay the tale of a far more famous, and historically impactful booing of an autocrat.
It was December 21, 1989, six weeks after the fall of the Berlin Wall. Nicolai Ceaușescu had ruled Romania with an iron fist for over three decades, and the people were sick of his shit. Romania had sided with the fucking Nazis in World War II, then were conquered by the Soviet Union and spent the next forty-five years behind the Iron Curtain. The east side of that curtain was the death of fun. Plus, lots of actual death.
When the Berlin Wall fell, many of the Russian satellite states were all you know what? Fuck this commie bullshit. We wanna be our own democratic countries. And it was largely a peaceful process. In what was then Czechoslovakia they called it a “Velvet Revolution.” Romania was the place where it was less about velvet and more about lining dictators up against a wall and launching several high-caliber holes into them.
It’s possible that Vance realized his campaign is Sofa King dead after getting booed yesterday, but Nicolai and his equally terrible wife had an inkling they were legit gonna die when they got booed on that winter solstice.
With the fall of the wall, the Soviet Union said we’re outta here. They pulled their support from the communist regimes in Eastern Europe, and revolutions rapidly took place in Poland, Bulgaria, East Germany, Hungary, and the aforementioned Czechoslovakia. But Ceaușescu was all fuck that I’m not stepping down. Probably because he knew that staying in power was the only way for him to stay alive. Sort of like how Trump regaining power is the only way he can stay out of prison.
Anyway, protests were breaking out all over Romania because they too were sick of the dictatorial dicks running their country. On December 17, Ceaușescu ordered his military to open fire on protestors in the city of Timișoara, and many died. Four days later the General Secretary of the Romanian Communist party wanted to prove to his people that he was still immensely popular, so he held a rally in the capital city of Bucharest. A lot of those people were forced to go to that rally at gunpoint, given placards, and told when to sing and when to chant.
The murderous commie dictator started his speech, and unlike the Combover Caligula he actually had something dead on top of his head because it was winter. He quickly lost control of the crowd. Someone booed, then others joined in. The hecklers took over the crowd, and you can see in the video, which was watched live by most of the nation, the very moment when Ceaușescu realized oh shit I am so dead.
And he was. Four days later, on Christmas, he and his wife—who I’ll remind you was just as shitty—were arrested by the nation’s provisional government while trying to flee the country. They were given a quick trial, put against a wall, and riddled with bullets by soldiers who had volunteered for the duty.
Nothing like that will happen in the United States, and we absolutely don’t want it to. On second thought, if Tangerine Palpatine takes power again, he very well may usher in executions of political figures he doesn’t like. But as much as Harris and Walz are seen as commie dictators by the delusional devotees of the dotard, Harris believes in the modern justice system.
I wish to conclude by talking about the upcoming U.S. Presidential election, and what could possibly happen. I know we’re told to be cautious, to not get our hopes up too high. Because we fear that if we think it’s in the bag, it will be another 2016. That is a real fear, and so I have a counter to that. And the counter is the wish for obliteration of the Republican party. And overwhelming destruction via democracy.
They are getting booed. The rallies are shrinking. No one gives a fuck about that assassination attempt. Do you even remember the shooter’s name? I don’t. And the Manchurian Cantaloupe’s ear sure seemed to heal awfully quick.
The felon is fading fast, and no one ever liked the couch fucker. Conversely, Harris and Walz continue to surge. The money and the volunteers continue to pour in, the rallies are joyful and hopeful. The GOP’s Jaundiced Jesus has siphoned the money away from down-ticket candidates for his own campaign, and also for his legal bills. It’s possible not just for Kamala to win, but for the Democratic Party to take all three houses.
I hesitate even to whisper the word “supermajority.”


Lefties like to criticize that President Obama didn’t do certain things when he had a supermajority, except that the political realities of that situation meant that he actually didn’t have one. But what if people are so goddamn sick of Republican bullshit that it was an absolute crushing defeat for them? What if Harris was given such a powerful mandate that she could overcome filibusters and actually push through progressive policies?
I think the ingredients might be there to make it happen. Trump is losing enthusiasm, losing support. On the other side, we have earnest zeal for the Harris-Walz ticket. Hope has returned to the nation, despite how fucktacularly biased the media coverage has been. And that hope is tied to fear of the alternative. The recent corrupt Supreme Court rulings, the Project 25 horseshit, and Trump saying he’s gonna be a dictator on Day 1 are all motivating forces as well.
In 2016, a lot of people didn’t think he could win, but then he did. And then people saw what he did. And now they see that he wants to do much worse. After the mistakes of 2016, the Democrats learned how to win again, in 2018, 2020, and 2022. The choosing of Harris was masterfully strategic, perfectly handled. They are in this to win, and win bigly.
Trump isn’t even the real fear anymore. It’s Vance and his billionaire backers. Vance has shown that he’s a puppet. He was once highly critical of Trump, comparing him to Hitler. But now he sings his praises. The billionaire class only need Trump to win the election. But after retaking office I don’t think he’d last very long. He’s decaying in real time, or he might have an accident. Hell, an assassination may be staged and blamed on Democrats and then Vance would have free reign to become President for Life. He'd be told what to do and happily comply in exchange for getting to implement his version of The Handmaid’s Tale.
Yes, there is that fear. But there is also much hope. My advice is to hope not just for Harris to win, but for the Democratic Party to deal the GOP such a crushing defeat that it must completely remodel itself into something far less … psychotic.
And that would be a good thing for the United States. Having a rational conservative party could lead to a sea change in American politics. But it’s only going to happen if they are so utterly destroyed in this election that they have no choice but to change their evil ways.
The possibility is real. This November can truly change the fate of a nation, and even the world. When you consider issues like climate change, this may be your best chance to change the fate of humanity with your vote.
We are a couple of months away from what could be a major historical event, and you are part of it. So do your part.