Imagine going to the doctor, and at the end of the 10-minute exchange, she writes you a prescription, looks you in the eye and says “garlic, twice a day, for a week.”
There is a reason why that doesn’t happen. It’s because their ignorance has been constructed, built, over 10-15 years. That’s how long it takes to become a General Practitioner (Australia) or Family Physician (US).
The primary tool of ignorance construction is omission.
Interview with Karen Brennan, PhD
Then Lustig taught me how little Doctors are taught about nutrition.
Only 28 percent of medical schools have a formal nutrition curriculum; even fewer than in 1977 when Congress passed the law that created the Dietary Guidelines and called for more nutrition science in the medical classroom. Now, medical students receive on average 19.6 contact hours of nutrition instruction during their four-year medical school careers, about 0.27 percent of the time spent in class. How is your doctor supposed to provide nutrition advice if they never learned it in the first place? – Metabolical
I’m glad to have recently discovered Dr Morton Walker. He has done a lot of heavy lifting over numerous books to lift back the veil of ignorance for those not as brainwashed as Family Physicians.
I discovered that he wrote a wonderful book on garlic which is the basis of this stack.
But first, let’s start with the magnificent book, Dissolving Illusions.
For centuries, garlic has been believed to ward off sickness. It has been used for the common cold, high blood pressure, and the prevention of gangrene. Onion is a close relative of garlic and has also been used in the treatment of many diseases. A 1903 article reported that people who ate onions were immune to smallpox. The article also stated that these same people were rarely vaccinated.
Dr. A. P. Seligman, vaccine physician to the city Board of Health, who has given considerable attention to the study and pathology of smallpox, declares that onion-eating people are virtually immune from the disease. Not a single case has broken out among the inhabitants of the Italian, Polish and Hungarian settlements. These people consume large quantities of onions. Vaccination is extremely rare among them.
In 1901 garlic was used to treat 200 patients with tuberculosis in the City Hospital of Venice. Improvement was noted in all stages of the disease.
Over 200 patients were thus treated in addition to the ordinary hygienic and symptomatic treatment. An improvement is said to have taken places in all stages of tuberculosis, especially in the early cases… the cough is lessened, the local physical signs disappear, as do the night-sweats and hemoptyses [coughing up of blood], and there is a remarkable improvement in appetite and the general condition.
In 1902 Dr. Minchin published an article entitled “The Successful Treatment of Tuberculosis and Lupus by Garlic.” He was quoted as saying:
I look upon it as a perfectly safe treatment, and also an efficient one in all cases of pulmonary tuberculosis in nearly all moderately- advanced cases, and in those in a very advanced stage. Its action is fairly rapid… I have had so much success with it that I have come to look upon few cases of consumption as hopeless.
In 1904 an interesting study was published about guinea pigs who were exposed to tuberculosis. The group that was fed a daily diet of garlic stayed free of infection. However, the control group that was not fed garlic became infected.
[Dr. Carrazzani] believes that a sufficiently generous use of garlic in tuberculosis will produce immunity against infection. Of a group of guinea pigs kept in an atmosphere charged with tubercle bacilli, those whose daily diet had contained one gm. of garlic were found at the end of three months to be free from tuberculosis, while the others were badly infected… The views of Dr. Carrazzani include a hint at an explanation for the comparatively low death rate from pulmonary tuberculosis among the Italians, both in their own country, and in America.
A 1917 article showed that, of 56 different treatments tried in the Metropolitan Hospital in New York, garlic proved to be the best against tuberculosis. Garlic was also found to be effective against whooping cough.
William Charles Minchin writing in the Medical Press and Circular for June 13, 1917, gives the results of years of special study of the therapeutic action of oil of garlic. This oil is composed of allylsulphide with volatile terpenes, and would appear to be Nature’s antiseptic for internal use, destroying many pathogenic germs within the body, and being at the same time harmless to the tissues… In the treatment of whooping cough Minchin has found garlic to be most efficacious. In the case of adults an inhalation of fresh succusallii sativa, rapidly relieves the distressing symptoms. It must be used, however, continuously from three to five hours for two or three days in order to produce the best results. In the case of infants and young children 20 minims to half a dram of the juice of garlic taken internally every four hours in a little syrup gives speedy relief in the early stages. The author lays special emphasis upon the beneficial effects of garlic in the treatment of tuberculosis, and he quotes the results obtained by the staff of the Metropolitan Hospital, New York, in the treatment of 1082 cases of tuberculosis according to fifty-six different methods, out of which garlic gave the best results.
Modern science is confirming what has been known for hundreds of years - garlic is effective in helping the body fight infections. A 2003 study examined the use of orally ingested garlic against Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA), which is now a common and deadly pathogen that is resistant to many conventional antibiotics. They concluded that garlic “inhibited the growth of and killed MRSA.… in a dose- dependent manner.”