I'm normally a kind person, but nothing makes me happier than seeing a bully cry.
I think this is the fundamental character trait that bullies are too self-obsessed to ever recognize. Tolerant people aren't “weak,” they just prefer not to hurt other living things. But tolerant people are capable of retaliation if it can't be avoided, or if it's in self-defense. Prison isn’t an act of cruelty when the condemned is guilty of terrible acts.
When a person pesters you long enough, you overcome your distaste as a matter of survival. But the thing about kind people is that they don't fight for pleasure. When they're provoked to a response, they finish the job. We can’t allow our otherwise kind nature to allow bullies the space to regroup so that they might resume their torment of the helpless and the marginalized.
We need to be better champions of decency. It’s time to stop entertaining the delusional belief that hardworking people aren’t being abused and exploited. It’s time to wake up.
Don't mess with a person's family. That includes treating them with respect. That includes pronouncing their names correctly. That includes not making disparaging generalizations about their heritage or culture. That means not sexually assaulting them. That means not being a bully.
I have a 90 pound lab. He's a sweet, sweet dog with big white shining teeth. Most of the time he's content to come trotting up with his tail wagging, but I shudder to think of what would happen to anyone who tried to inflict harm on my daughters. That dog would press those long white teeth into the throat of the attacker and shake until his head became a blur.
If somebody tried to hurt my daughters, I'd be standing right beside him going, “Good dog! Good dog! Good dog!”
There are transgressions that shall not stand. My daughters shall not have their bodies taken from them.
But too often, our society acts as if abusing a person's family is a legitimate political perspective. Immigrants are unfairly run down in the media every day. We act like it's no big deal that Conservatives tried to overthrow the government. They destroyed government property. They got a police officer killed.
Every day, the news disparages the innocent while disregarding the 100,000 stories of white supremacists hurting and tormenting and killing and raping. This ideology is a plague. For some reason, every time we talk about banning their marches, it turns into a disingenuous discussion on free speech.
Hate speech is not protected!
We have violent lawless people in our society, but they are NOT immigrants, they are NOT minority groups, they are not the LGBTQ+ community. The groups that are constantly attacked are kind and loving and educated and hard-working. Like always, the people who are most disparaged by our media are the ones most committed to building and maintaining our society.
If you want to thank somebody for your freedoms, thank a member of one of those groups. They're the ones working tirelessly to protect them. In many cases, they're sacrificing their lives.
Meanwhile, rich assholes who were born into privilege and who never once had to endure the hardship of want nor work, are allowed to bleat and belch and vomit their malicious worldview. They're given HUGE platforms on mainstream media. They incessantly spread misinformation about good, hardworking, decent people. They're allowed to incite violence against them, and nobody, not even our religious institutions, ever stands up to demand it must stop.
It's disgusting.
Let's have those 100,000 stories about the various ways traditional, patriarchal assholes are abusing children, or ripping people off, or refusing to pay their bills, or shoulder slamming everyone as they walk by on the street.
God, I'm sick of those people. I can tell when I'm getting really angry because I start to go the gym more. I start waiting for one of those jerks to shoulder slam me, because that's assault, and I am allowed to respond once assaulted.
But the thing about bullies is they recognize when a good person is seeing red. Once you become bigger than they are, they stop messing with you. But those of us who are good have to remember that bullies NEVER stop looking for targets. They'll seek out the vulnerable, they'll seek out the marginalized, they'll seek out the sick, and they'll treat them with appalling cruelty.
They never do anything just because it's the right thing to do. They only behave when they’re under the threat of greater power, then they become fawning and pathetic flatterers. They start praising dictators and mass murders because they don't have a spine or a shred of decency.
They can't help themselves. When they sense weakness, they have to exploit it and torment it and pester it.
I'd prefer that such things didn't exist in the world, but it does no good to deny reality. All that does is permit the awful, evil, abusive bullies to have their way with the innocent.
We can't allow that!
We need a collective reality check. It's time to point out the monsters living among us. You can tell by the yard signs and the red hats and the silicone testicles hanging off their polluting trucks.
We're under no obligation to hold ourselves to a higher standard of decency while somebody is engaged in the physical act of assaulting our children. If you say, “well, those aren't my children, so why should I get involved?” you're no better than the bully.
You can't make friends with people like this. You can't compromise with them. You can't try and see things from their point of view. All they want to do is find a person who is weak and torture them. These are like the scumballs that go down the river, light firecrackers, and shove them in a frog's mouth.
People do stuff like that! I've seen it. I punched a kid for doing that once, and I was the one who got in trouble.
“It's just a frog.”
“No, God damn it, it's a living thing and all living things should be treated with respect.”
“Well then, why aren't you treating me with respect?”
“Because once you reveal yourself to be a monster, you no longer deserve respect. You can’t claim to be protected by a rule you fail to recognize. You're a threat, and if I let you go, I become complicit in the pain you inflict on every other creature you meet.”
Today, right now, a terrible percentage of our society is legitimizing a threat. What does the guy stand for? Think about it! He stands for lying. He stands for rape. He stands for disrespect. He stands for cheating. He stands for oppression and exploitation and misery. He stands for cowardice and a lack of accountability.
He's a god damned bully.
On the school playground, bullies need to be punched in the mouth. When they grow into adults, who become wealthy because they delight in exploiting and cheating everyone around them, they need to be held accountable both in real court and the court of public opinion.
Their enablers, too, must be held accountable. That includes the apologists who say things like, “Hey now, not all people who are wealthy cheated people.”
Yeah they did, wealth is a consequence of exploitation. The exploitation might not be immediately apparent, but it's there. It might be your neighbor, or it might be somebody on another continent, but every time one person has too much, it's because another person was forced to have too little.
We all need to stop passively defending oppression, and start deliberately defending justice. Quit with the lazy arguments that serve to legitimize tyrants. They're all bad, all of them. When we find our commitment to empowering the vulnerable, the bullies will go extinct.
Good riddance.
Bullies need to feel tough because they know how weak and pathetic and useless they are. That's why they are perpetually on the lookout for vulnerability which they can force to eat firecrackers. When they watch something beautiful get destroyed, they laugh and experience a fleeting sense of titillation that distracts them from the empty void that is their soul.
We can't allow our friends and family to act like this is a “healthy and normal” worldview. It's not. It's a sickness. Stomping around wanting to punish everything just for being alive is a sickness.
We need to embrace the idea of helping each other. Help don't hurt, what a concept!
The reason bullies are so weak and pathetic is because of the things they believe. We have to stop acting like believing those things is okay, both for our benefit and for theirs. There's nothing but misery and destruction if you live a life committed to self-righteously inflicting agony on everything you meet. We have to put an end to all discussions that cultivate the atmosphere of deceit which allows bullies to take control.
Seriously, why the fuck is this guy allowed to run for president? He just took a giant shit on Arlington. He already wiped his ass with the constitution. He keeps breaking law after law after law. He's bragged ON TAPE about sexually assaulting women. This is a repugnant, sorry excuse for a human being. It's a stain on our history that his name should be associated with our society. People who decorate their yards with his likeness, might as well smear fecal matter on their walls and windows.
It's time for a blue wave to rise and flush that turd. That's just the beginning. When it's finally gone, we have to set about scrubbing every corner of our society to remove the corruption, stains and stench. This is going to be a big job, and it's going to make a lot of powerful people very uncomfortable.
Good.
Somebody should have said something when they were running around blowing up frogs. The people who said nothing, are just as bad as the bullies. When we all understand that, we'll start the needed and long-delayed progress towards creating the society that our children deserve.
Don’t be deterred when the same entities who call for “retribution,” “dictatorships,” “violence” and “bloodbaths,” turn around and claim it’s their opponents who are inciting social division.
This is dishonest.
Only now, after silently observing the tormenter exploit the vulnerable again and again… only now when a change in the prevailing winds suggests the evil he’s put out into the world might be blown back at him… only now do these false counselors, who were content to remain silent in the face of countless abuses… only now when the villain is on the cusp of accountability do they argue the merits of clemency?
Where were their arguments when the monster gleefully lashed out at every helpless soul in his vicinity? Where were their silver tongued condemnations of unprovoked hostility then?
These people are false. They see enabling abuse as an opportunity to harvest their own profit. Do not be deceived. We have to stop entertaining the worldview of liars, oppressors, and thieves. It’s time to dedicate all our airtime to the concept of decency.
Don’t make apologies for evil.
Instead, celebrate and protect those with a commitment to doing good.