After two nights of god-like rage, the wind and rain and even hail, the darkness of the night having conjured biblical, apocalyptic if fleeting fears—though Rocky for those two nights, lay in his ancient deafness oblivious to whatever it was that god was saying—there is this morning an exhausted stillness enveloping us, Rocky and me as we make our way through our little park which is strewn with twisted fronds of palm trees and tree branches flung across the paths,  torn off in those nights of rage.
Rocky is not only almost deaf, but he can’t see very well either. He is panicked by the sound of certain passing cars ― I think four-wheel drives in particular―and by the curses of the homeless woman who lives in the arcade on Acland Street. He is panicked when he suddenly sees people walking past us, when they are so near we could touch them, and then he stops and sits down and lowers his head and we wait there together until he feels that it is safe to move on.
Perhaps it was the god-like rage of those two nights of wind and rain and hail, perhaps it was the fact that we had not walked for three mornings that explains my wholly unexpected encounter with Allan Ginsberg.
Ginsberg was not a great poet.  Who reads his poetry nowadays, how many people even know his name, this once Jewish beat poet, but this morning as we set out for our walk, before we made our way into the little park with its branch-strewn paths, for reasons that will probably remain a mystery to me, the first line of Howl came to me:
I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed
by madness…
And that is all of Howl that I could remember, and I have a feeling that this is because the rest of the poem is an anticlimax, each verse a raging anticlimax.
Memories can have no rhyme or reason. Why Ginsberg? Why Howl? Why that first line?  I don’t know but I can speculate even if, in the end, such speculation is meaningless.
I think it would be an exaggeration to say the least, to suggest that the best minds of my generation― or subsequent generations for that matter― have been destroyed by madness. Indeed, I could be considered unhinged were I to suggest, for instance, that my generation and subsequent generations of journalists and writers and musicians, some of whom I have known for a long time, have been gripped by madness. Let alone destroyed by it.
Indeed, some would consider  it unhinged, were I to say that the cartoon this morning in my old paper by Cathy Wilcox— her response to the murder of six young hostages who were shot by their Hamas guards,  was so lacking in pity and sorrow and humanity that perhaps it is the case, that some journalists and cartoonists have been driven  so mad that they are unable to see anything beyond their hatred for Israel and Israelis and Zionists and Netanyahu. And their dislike of Jews like me.
The cartoon is of a group of Israeli politicians sitting at a table and one asks Netanyahu about the hostages, what can be done to save them, and his response is `Punish the Palestinians a little harder?’
I hardly read my old paper. I hardly listen to the ABC. I feel unwelcome in the pages of the paper I edited for seven years—as a reader I mean, as a Jew with a deep connection to  Israel and Israelis―and the ABC to me feels like a cold and sometimes heartless place.
It’s as if sorrow and grief and righteous rage which is clearly there ―and rightly there― in the pages of my old paper and on the ABC  when it comes to the suffering of the Palestinians, freezes the hearts of editors and journalists and once  great broadcast journalists to what happened to those young men and women who were held captive for 11 months and then executed, shot, some shot several times, some shot in the head, by people capable of unfathomable horror.
As we walk through the little park across the road from our house, stopping every few metres now because Rocky wants to go home and finds the obstacles on the paths along which we are walking increasingly tiresome, I think, on reflection, that this memory of Howl and Ginsberg  did not so much trigger a contemplation of the ways in which journalists have been rendered mad and heartless when it comes to Israel and Israelis and even Jews, but how much my life has changed these past 11 months.
From when I was young—even before I had left school—I wanted to be a journalist. I loved newspapers. I loved the smell of them, the feel of them, the way the ink rubbed off on your fingers. From when I was a boy, I thought the world was there in those often-smudged pages, brought to me by these mysterious, mostly anonymous people who went out into the world and came back and brought that world, in words and pictures, to me.
From when I was a boy, I loved the paper I eventually edited. Now I hardly ever do any more than flick through its pages. I hardly ever watch or listen to the ABC.  And I do wonder what all this means for someone like me, who spent a lifetime in this world created for me by journalists and editors. 
My world most mornings  is now these streets and the boardwalk along the beach and the gardens nearby where the double poppies are beginning to bloom and where Rocky, old as he is, sometimes still dances along beside me and where, this morning, I can conjure the faces of those murdered young people, those murdered young Jews, and mourn their deaths without qualification.