A long, long time ago. On the last leg of a book tour I had travelled to Washington DC to give a reading at a well-known and much-loved bookshop, Politics and Prose.
It was a beautiful evening of literature, one that would stay with me. The audience was engaged and insightful, the questions kept coming. After the talk and the Q & A and the book signing, it was time to go back to the hotel. I thanked the staff who had been very kind. That was when a bookseller shook my hand and asked:
‘We were wondering, do you like Walt Whitman?’
“I adore him,’ I replied.
‘We thought so,’ he said. Smiling, he produced a book: Walt Whitman: Poetry and Prose.
‘A small gift from all of us.’
It was no small gift. It was a big gift. Hardcover, over 1300 pages. The hefty tome held the entire collection of Whitman’s poetry and finished prose. I was over the moon. It was the best present ever! And with a warm feeling of gratitude in my heart I returned to the hotel.
My plan was to start reading over a nice dinner. But it was late by the time I arrived in the hotel, of which I don’t remember much, other than that the rooms were small and the carpets had odd, dizzying, psychedelic patterns. The kitchen was long closed and there was no room service. Not even an apple or a bag of crisps. This kind of situation happens often to writers and poets. You finish an event and you realise you haven’t eaten in hours and then you have to go out again close to midnight looking for a nearby restaurant still serving food or an open corner shop.
And this is what we did—Walt Whitman and I. We went out, foraging.
I found a local convenience store, much to my delight, but as soon as I reached out for a bag of pretzels came a voice—gravelly and hoarse, as if unused to speaking.
‘Don’t get junk food!’
I looked around to see who was speaking and then I glanced down—at the cover of the book I was holding. Walt Whitman stared back at me, frowning.
It didn’t surprise me that much. I knew he was a health guru, after all.
‘What do you want me to eat?’ I asked.
‘At this hour, nothing, but if you must, try buckwheat cakes.’
‘How am I going to find buckwheat cakes?’
‘Well, then eat meat,’ he replied. ‘Be a carnivore, to the exclusion of everything else.’
‘I am sorry, I’m starving,’ I protested. ‘And I like pretzels.’
He sighed. ‘Then get that box of sliced pineapple over there. Although, upon second thought, it might contain unwanted bacteria. Pity you don’t have a beard like me. A good beard keeps the germs away.’
I did not challenge him. The shop-owner was watching my every move suspiciously. I bought the pretzels and the pineapples. When I returned to the hotel however, I was too tired to eat, too tired to read.
‘We must all sleep in the open air with the earth,’ said Walt Whitman.
‘Sorry, I am staying in my room.’
‘Fine, then go to bed early. A brisk leap out of bed in the morning is the best. ’
‘Good night, I’ll start reading you tomorrow,’ I mumbled The next day, very early in the morning, I was flying back.
‘To me every hour of the day and the night is an unspeakably perfect miracle,’ replied Walt Whitman.
He could be annoying like that.
But the next morning, having arrived at the airport with almost an hour delay, in my silly haste, I forgot the book inside a security tray. By the time I realised what I had done I was already on the plane to Istanbul.
I have never forgiven myself for losing such a precious gift. I have never allowed myself to purchase that same edition. At home today, I have several books by Whitman, but not that exquisite collection.
Why?
Because I am still waiting for it to come back to me. I know it is totally irrational. I know it is utterly mad. But there is a part of me that it convinced that on that day another passenger must have picked up the book and put it in their suitcase and then probably lost it somewhere, just like I have done, and in this way Walt Whitman has been traveling from city to city, culture to culture all these years, and someday we will meet again and he will smile and frown at me from the cover, and say:
‘The pineapple-pretzel writer! Where have you been?’
Literary superstitions? Perhaps. But as Goethe said:
“Superstition is the poetry of life; both build an imaginary world, and between the things of the actual, palpable world they anticipate the most marvellous connections.”
If you happen to find my Walt Whitman book, now with frayed pages and a tattered spine, visibly weathered but all the more wiser, just do let me know.