There are a few similarities between Mary Emmons and Sally Hemings. No pictures exist of either woman born into enslavement. Mary was associated with Aaron Burr, and Sally with Thomas Jefferson. At one moment, both men were tied in electoral votes to become President of the United States. Alexander Hamilton hated Burr more than Jefferson and swung the tide in Jefferson’s favor. Burr later killed Hamilton in a duel.
There is a book about Mary Emmons, The Secret Wife of Aaron Burr, by Susan Holloway Scott. Unfortunately, with so much truth available to be told, hers is primarily fiction, making up what she didn’t know and changing what was inconvenient. The illustration on one of her editions shows a woman of color, but barely. All the depictions of Sally Hemings do so also. In Susan Holloway Scott’s novel, Mary Emmons was born in Haiti. Scott’s book made her the product of a mother from India and a British soldier who raped her. Maybe making her half-white made her more palatable despite how she got there. The real Mary Emmons was born in Calcutta with no known British soldier involved. She was sold into slavery at a young age and later sent to Haiti.
Despite references elsewhere to Mary Emmons as a maid, she was enslaved, not a domestic, free to come and go as she pleased. Emmons was brought to America by James Marcus Prevost who was married to Theodosia Prevost. James was once a Lieutenant Colonel in the British army stationed in Haiti. He contracted yellow fever there, which he later died from in 1781. Theodosia married Aaron Burr in 1782, bringing the enslaved Mary into their household.
Theodosia was quite famous in her own right and very much a patriot during the Revolutionary War. Her home, The Hermitage (not to be associated with Andrew Jackson’s Hermitage), was the site of secret meetings and a hangout for George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, Marquis de Lafayette, and Aaron Burr. If you had wondered about the proximity of the death of James Prevost and Theodosia’s marriage to Aaron Burr? Burr and Theodosia started up well before Prevost’s death, and Theodosia later reaped what she had sown.
Theodosia had four children with Aaron Burr, two of them stillborn. You should also know that Aaron Burr was affectionately known as a rake, a lothario, or in modern terms, a whore. Burr was doing not just the ladies in his home but all over Washington DC. While he was making babies with his wife, he was also having two children with her slave, Mary Emmons, and at least once, they were pregnant at the same time in the same household. You’d think Marry Emmons and Theodosia Prevost Jefferson would be at each other’s throats, but apparently, they got along well, with Mary becoming indispensable in running the Burr household. Theodosia died of cancer in 1794, leaving Mary Emmons the undisputed queen of the roost.
Marry Emmon’s children, Louisa Charlotte and Jean Pierre became abolitionists. Though they had several familial ties to Princeton University, neither could attend because they were of color, and Louisa was a woman. In adulthood, Louisa became a maid and Jean Pierre a barber. Both went on to marry free Black people establishing the line of Black people descended from Aaron Burr. In 2018, the Burr family acknowledged Louisa, Jean Pierre, and their descendants as Burrs after DNA testing proved what an oral history could not.
One descendant, “Aunt Doll,” allegedly possessed a marriage certificate showing Aaron Burr and Mary Emmons were secretly married. She is said to have burned it after being unable to get other family members to take an interest. Had Aaron Burr been declared President instead of Thomas Jefferson, we still would have had an enslaved woman of color secreted away. Just a different one from another nation.