The dust has settled on a curious summer and a tough opening three weeks of the season at Wolves. A point at Nottingham Forest last Saturday got Gary O’Neil’s side off the mark, and the international break arrives with a certain calmness restored after some busy final hours in the transfer market too.
Despite several players departing with their national sides, others have a chance to work on the training ground in preparation for a challenging four-game league spell ahead of the October international break. There are several areas the head coach is looking to develop but a key one is his stated desire to see the team being more aggressive without the ball. This involves getting the defence higher up the pitch, but it will be done with four at the back. O’Neil is firm in his belief that Wolves will only progress this way if he can go with a back four, and will avoid reverting to a three if at all possible.
That was evident against Nottingham Forest when Craig Dawson’s return to the side did not see the shape changed to accommodate three centre-halves. Instead, Toti moved to left-back and Rayan Ait-Nouri joined the three behind Jorgen Strand Larsen. It immediately appeared to pay dividends when the Algerian international almost opening the scoring after a couple of minutes. But as the game wore on, Forest got to grips with the situation. If Toti and Ait-Nouri are going to be the solution down the left this season, then both will need to raise their levels consistently.
Formations are only numbers on a piece of paper until the ball is in play. O’Neil showed in his first season how fluid he can be with systems, but as a starting base 4-2-3-1 is arguably the nearest to his ideal set-up at kick-off, with any movement in shape coming from that structure. Has he got the players to do that? With reservations, yes.
After two summers where Wolves struggled in the transfer market, this window represented a step forward. By no means did everything go to plan and there are still questions surrounding certain issues. O’Neil’s admission that he would have to adapt his ideas to fit the type of player the club signed – or didn’t sign, more pertinently – is a concern. Yet, as a first team squad, there is evidently more strength in depth than there was in May.
While the goalkeeper position has been bolstered with the arrival of Sam Johnstone, there is uncertainty about Jose Sa’s role now. He proved too expensive to move on before deadline day and was then released early for international duty with Portugal, but that just served to kick the can down the road. It is hard to envisage how he accepts spending this season on the bench and he is not happy with that scenario. A clean break is still possible, with the Turkish transfer window not closing until 13 September.
The coaching staff accept that some patience is needed with Pedro Lima. But his signing, like the acquisition of Andre who will ideally become a first team regular within a few games, could also represent a nod to the future. The age profile of players is important. Nelson Semedo and Matt Doherty are both the wrong side of 30 so the hope is that Lima can be a long-term solution.
The recruitment department are never just looking at filling gaps in the current side, they are preparing for the eventuality of players moving on further down the line. Just as Pedro Neto was never going to remain at the club beyond this summer, 12 months on there may be others who are the subject of significant transfer bids where it makes financial sense to accept offers in line with the club’s strategy.
Joao Gomes and Ait-Nouri have been subject of genuine interest already and while O’Neil has no intention of losing either player, it is best practise to have long-term replacements available, which is one reason why Andre’s acquisition - in an area where Wolves are not necessarily short - is important.
“We are not going to be letting people leave unless we have good replacements,” said O’Neil on the eve of this season, acknowledging that there is now a process where Wolves need to have as much cover in place as possible.
The exception to that rule has come at centre-half where Wolves could not find a replacement for Max Kilman. That is a concern for the recruitment department and coaching staff. The omission rests uneasily with supporters, too, after watching the opening games. O’Neil is clearly disappointed that he is left short, but if Andre can acclimatise quickly then the Brazilian will offer a defensive screen in what could turn out to be a very robust and powerful midfield.
Further forward, Larsen has shown enough in the opening three games to suggest he can establish himself as the focal point of an attack that is still over-reliant on Matheus Cunha. With Rodrigo Gomes and Carlos Forbs coming in, alongside the returning Goncalo Guedes, the forward positions are the most obviously strengthened areas on last season. They will need to be. Any aggressive front foot style must come with goals.
Saturday’s starting line-up saw three of this season’s Premier League debutants in key positions: Johnstone, Yerson and Larsen. With Guedes and Andre coming off the bench, the evolution of the side is continuing as the current coaching staff look to take the next step with this squad.
Anybody who watched Shaun Derry on the pitch during his long career would find it difficult to imagine him coaching an array of Brazilian international talent, but it says a lot about O’Neil and his staff that there is a clear bond within the group, even if there are vocal challenges within that. In a Times interview last month, Cunha readily admitted that arguments are part of his development under O’Neil. “We have some fights, of course,” he said. “We both want to win and the fight is when I think we need to win this way and he shows me, no, it is another way…It is not easy to have a lot of guys from different cultures but the whole team has an unbelievable relationship with him.”
The growing Brazilian influence is fascinating, a direct result of Matt Hobbs’ many trips to South America which began during his previous role as chief scout. On Saturday there was a moment when Andre was preparing to come on for his debut but had to wait while the coaching staff received a message from the physio on the pitch, who was treating Larsen. O’Neil quickly turned to Gomes on the bench and asked him to explain to Andre what was happening. With many nationalities, and a few players lacking any conversational English, there needs to be this type of dynamic communication where others take on the responsibilities of translator.
Both Hobbs and O’Neil had to show some ingenuity around budgets as Fosun sought to conclude the transfer window in the black. The departure from Jorge Mendes recruits continued although the agent, who was so crucial to Wolves’ rise under Fosun, was still responsible for over half of the transfer fees recouped this summer. While the South American market has opened up, it would be unwise to move any further away from Mendes. The link-up with Gestifute gave Wolves a competitive edge around key signings in Fosun’s early years and should be retained for exactly this benefit in the future.
While the days of European football have receded in the rear view mirror in recent seasons, O’Neil has spoken of that ambition and believes it is on the club’s radar going forward, if acknowledging that achieving enough points to stay in the division is always a priority. One did not have far to look on Saturday for a reminder of what can be achieved, as Nuno Espirito Santo and his coaches sat in the home dugout. That might require the type of net investment that Fosun bankrolled back then. Is it realistic to expect funding to continue apace or do circumstances require a more pragmatic outlook?
The landscape has changed since the global pandemic but Fosun has strengthened its resolve since those challenges, when some financial observers feared the conglomerate was in trouble. After lowering its debt with asset sales over the past two years, recent focus has switched to four core subsidiaries: Fosun Pharma, Fosun Insurance Portugal, Fosun Tourism Group and Yuyuan. The interim financial results of 2024 published last week listed £10billion in total revenue-maintained growth, with three-quarters of that coming from these core subsidiaries.
“We continued to resolutely execute our strategy of focusing on core businesses, developing industry-leading companies and products in the industries where we have formed advantages,” said chairman Guo Guangchang, when the results were announced. “We have maintained our focus on innovation and globalisation, while focusing on asset-light operations, driving long-term development with competitive core strengths.”
Wolves has a different place within the group, as part of Fosun Sports, yet the club remains strategically important. Relegation would see the asset value plummet, so Fosun would never want to put the club at any risk, which is why investment to date has been in the region of £300million+ to become established in the Premier League. But take the eye off the ball and any club can find trouble, as Leicester City - Champions in 2016 and FA Cup winners in 2021 - discovered with relegation in 2023. The balance Wolves needs to achieve now is finding a way of allowing the team to continually evolve while meeting the wider demands of the ownership in Shanghai.
The relationship between supporters and Fosun took a battering in the early summer with the announcement of new season-ticket prices, and there are obviously lingering frustrations. Time will tell how that one plays out. Tickets are likely to be on general sale for most games, with sell-out crowds a rarity. But if the matchday roll-up sales take the attendance figures close to capacity then the decision to hike prices may appear vindicated, unjustifiable though it was in the wider context.
What the long summer of angst did illustrate was the need for clarity of communication. It is perhaps understandable given the cultural and geographical separation that exists within the set-up but there is an opaqueness that, at times, can leave supporters and football staff wondering what the future holds. The summer break heightened concerns when there was no football to take centre stage.
Finally underway, the 2024/25 season is already shaping up to be as challenging as any other. Now the transfer window has closed, minds can genuinely turn to what lies ahead on the pitch with an exciting ensemble of talent which requires moulding into a productive unit. Can O’Neil’s Wolves break from the trusted three-man defence and forge a new path? Just one of many questions that will be answered in the coming months.