“Not long after the indictment was returned, she set the tone for how she planned to handle the matter by telling Mr. Trump that when he was in her courtroom, she planned to look on him as a criminal defendant, not a former president. As for the fact that he was running for office again, that, she said somewhat dismissively, was his “day job.”
The above is from an article in The NY Times about Judge Tanya Chutkan, who has been handed back the Trump federal election interference case. Sounds like she’s going to move fast and take no c**p from Trump and his lawyers. She has been waiting on the sidelines while they hashed it out with the Supreme Court, resulting in Trump was given a measure of immunity. Special counsel Jack Smith reworked the charges in light of the new found immunity given to Trump, and now it’s in her hands. The Judge laid out a schedule, and, “working on a Saturday in August, she also found time to tidy up her desk and deny two separate motions by Mr. Trump’s lawyers that the appellate process had forbidden her to touch for nearly a year.” (I found that language a bit informal for a major news story—I don’t know, is it me?)
Another interesting story today is that The US State Dept. is going to counter Russian interference in the election, stating that Russia favors Trump because of his stance on Ukraine. I like that they are being very open about this, letting Americans hear it loud and clear, and that they are being proactive. The department’s actions include “sanctions, indictments and seizing of web domains that U.S. officials say the Kremlin uses to spread propaganda and disinformation.”
“The American people are entitled to know when a foreign power engages in political activities or seeks to influence public discourse,” Attorney General Garland said.
Finally, John McCain’s son Jimmy switched parties and endorsed Kamala Harris. I hope more Republicans come out. Where’s George Bush and Liz Cheney?
On a lighter note:
I saw this person today on the subway. She was so happy reading something on her phone, it was lovely.